The20th centurywas the century that began on  1 January1901(MCMI), and ended on 31 December2000(MM).[1][2]It was the 10th and last century of the2nd millenniumand was marked by new models of scientific understanding, unprecedented scopes of warfare, new modes of communication that would operate at nearly instant speeds, and new forms of art and entertainment.Population growthwas also unprecedented,[3]as the century started with around 1.6 billion people, and ended with around 6.2 billion.[4]
The 20th century was dominated by significant geopolitical events that reshaped the political and social structure of the globe:World War I, theSpanish flu pandemic,World War IIand theCold War. Unprecedentedadvances in science and technologydefined the century, including the advent ofnuclear weaponsandnuclear power,space exploration, theshift from analog to digital computingand the continuing advancement of transportation, includingpowered flightand theautomobile. The Earth's sixth mass extinction event, theHolocene extinction, continued, and humanconservation effortsincreased.
Major themes of the century includeddecolonization,nationalism,globalizationand new forms ofintergovernmental organizations.Democracyspread, andwomen were given the right to votein many countries in the world.Cultural homogenizationbegan through developments in emerging transportation andinformation and communications technology, withpopular musicand other influences ofWestern culture,international corporations, and what is arguably a trulyglobal economyby the end of the 20th century. Poverty was reduced and the century saw rising standards of living,world populationgrowth, awareness ofenvironmental degradationandecological extinction.[5][6]Automobiles,airplanes, andhome appliancesbecame common, andvideoandaudio recordingsaw mass adoption. These developments were made possible by the exploitation offossil fuelresources, which offered energy in an easily portable form, but also caused concern about pollution and long-term impact on theenvironment. Humans started to explorespace, taking their first footsteps on theMoon. Great advances inelectricity generationandtelecommunicationsallowed for near-instantaneous worldwide communication, ultimately leading to theInternet. Meanwhile, advances inmedical technologyresulted in the near-eradication anderadication of many infectious diseases, as well as opening the avenue of biologicalgenetic engineering. Scientific discoveries, such as thetheory of relativityandquantum physics, profoundly changed the foundational models of physical science, forcing scientists to realize that the universe is more complex than previously believed, and dashing the hopes (or fears) at the end of the 19th century that the last few details of scientific knowledge were about to be filled in.